---
title: Domain Name System (DNS) Part 1/2
author: Melroy van den Berg
type: post
date: 2024-01-01T00:00:00+01:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1354
categories:
  - Intermediate
  - Windows OS
---

This is a DNS blog series of two parts. This is part 1; an introduction to DNS, including some examples and experiments on the command line.

## What is DNS?

DNS stands for **D**omain **N**ame **S**ystem. Which is actually not a single server, but DNS a hierarchical and distributed service.

DNS is very important for the current Internet. DNS is used, among other things, to lookup IP address for a specific domain name.

Without DNS, users (yes you) would have to remember and type in IP addresses in their web browsers, which are long and difficult to remember. That would be no fun.

## How does DNS work?

DNS works by using a hierarchical system of domain names and IP addresses. When a user types a domain name into their browser, their computer sends a request to a DNS server, which then looks up the IP address associated with that domain name and returns it to the user's computer.

Root servers are the highest level of the DNS hierarchy. They are responsible for resolving the domain names of the top-level domains (TLDs) such as .com, .org, .net and so much more TLDs.

Even wondered why are there even dots in domain names ðŸ˜?

Take for example: `blog.melroy.org`. Well the domain is actually `blog.melroy.org.` (with a period at the end). Since it's a [fully qualified domain name](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fully_qualified_domain_name).

And each dot will separate the domain name, in this case: "blog", "melroy" and "org".

Assuming there is **no** cache. The search will start at one of the root servers. The root server doesn't know the IP of `blog.melroy.org`, but responsds with a name server for the TLD (.org). The recursive name server will then query the authoritative TLD name server for the domain name "melroy.org".
The TLD name server will respond with the authoritative name server for the domain name "melroy.org".

Finally, the recursive resolver will contact the authoritative name server for "melroy.org" to find the IP address for "blog.melroy.org". After that, your browser can contact the IP address and request the website.

**Did you know?**

> Did you know all the domains you visit are actually fully qualified domain names?
> And these domain names should always contain a dot at the end?
>
> Try it out yourself, use your browser and type: `blog.melroy.org.` (notice the trailing dot).
> If you leave out the dot at the end, your browser always assume it's a fully qualified domain name.
> This trick only works if you have at least one dot in the domain name (which is always the case nowadays).
>
> So in theory we could have a `http://ai.` domain, but that doesn't work (people just don't know how to enter it, if you enter `ai` it will just triggers a search). We do have [http://www.ai/](http://www.ai/) however....

### DNS cache

Not all DNS servers will constantly query the root servers. DNS servers typically cache the IP addresses of the root servers for a period of time, which can vary depending on the DNS server's configuration. This is also the reason that changing a DNS record will take some time to propagate across the internet and other name servers.

If you run software like Unbound on your computer, this will cache DNS records for you. Same for systemd-resolved. If you use systemd-resolved? First of all sorry to hear that, secondly you can execute: `sudo resolvectl show-cache` to see the cache.

If you use Unbound, you can see the cache via: `sudo unbound-control dump_cache`

### What is a DNS zone?

A DNS zone is a collection of DNS records that are associated with a specific domain name. Each DNS zone has its own set of DNS records, which are used to resolve domain names within that zone.

That is also the reason the configuration file within a DNS server is called a zone file. A zone file is a plain text file, it's initial release year is 1987 (36 years ago). It's a very old format and still used today by most authoritative DNS servers.

I don't go into the details of the zone file format, but it's important to know that the zone file contains the DNS records for a specific zone.
And the trailing dot at the end in a domain, used to indicate that the domain name is fully qualified, is critical in zone files.

In part 2 of this DNS series, we will setup our own name server and will create our own zone files.

### What are root servers?

[Root servers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_name_server#Root_server_addresses) are the highest level of the DNS hierarchy. They are responsible for resolving the domain names of the top-level domains (TLDs) such as .com, .org, and .net.

And how does your computer know where to find the root servers? Well, actually the root servers are hardcoded within the operating system. Or compiled within the software. There can only be 13 root servers by design. Most of the internet root servers are in operated by USA as its origin.

I know right? DNS isn't decentralized. I might be distributed, but DNS definitely **not** decentralized.

### What are recursive name servers?

A recursive name server (also known as _recursive resolver_) is a DNS server that is responsible for resolving domain names by querying other DNS servers.

A recursiver server does not have a zone file and does know have the information itself. It only knows how to query other DNS servers and store the response (cache) for a specific domain name.

Then, the follow up question might be, which server does have the answers? These are the **authoritative name servers**. The root servers (mentioned earlier) are all authoritative name servers. Software like Bind or NSD are used for authoritative name servers.

In part 2 of this DNS series, we will actually use NSD to setup our own authoritative name server.

### What are some common DNS records?

The most common DNS records are:

| Record Type | Description                                   |
| ----------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| A           | Maps a domain name to an IPv4 address         |
| AAAA        | Maps a domain name to an IPv6 address         |
| CNAME       | Maps one domain name to another domain name   |
| SOA         | Specifies the start of authority for a domain |
| NS          | Specifies the name server for a domain        |
| MX          | Specifies the (SMTP) mail server for a domain |
| TXT         | Contains arbitrary text                       |

`SOA` record is important for the DNS system it stands for Start Of Authority. It is the first record in a zone file and contains information about the zone, such as the name server that is authoritative for the zone, the serial number of the zone (aka version number basically), and the refresh, retry, and expire times for the zone.

Like shown above the `A` & `AAAA` records are the basics and the most common records to point to an IP address. `CNAME` is used to create aliases for domain names. `NS` records are used to specify the name server for the domain.

## Hands-on experiment

We will use the `dig` BIND command to query the DNS servers.

Under GNU/Linux the package is called `bind9-dnsutils` (Linux Mint/Ubuntu) in my case. On other distros it might be called `bind-tools` or just `bind` (Arch Linux). BIND is a full-fledged name server software, for now we just use DNS utility called `dig`. Using native Windows, you are out of luck.

We start with the most basic command. Execute the following command:

```sh
dig facebook.com.
```

That should contain an `;; ANSWER SECTION:` section. With the IPv4 address of Facebook.

**Did you know?**

> The name server used depends on your computer's configuration.
> Most likely your computer is configured by a DHCP server.
> The DHCP server probably provided you the primary (and secondary) DNS name servers.
> Which are often by default your ISP name servers (_blehh_).
> Within your router, you might be able to change the default name servers that are used across your network.
> On the device itself, you can also change the DNS settings per network interface.

**Did you know, Did you know!??**

> Under Linux you have the `/etc/resolv.conf` file.
> However this file can be _very misleading_ if this file only contains `nameserver 127.0.0.53` (meaning localhost/loopback).
> If you are using NetworkManager under a Debian/Ubuntu distro, it's very likely you are using something like `systemd-resolved`.
> Which has it's own configuration file: `/etc/systemd/resolved.conf`.
>
> Systemd-resolved has a DNS stub resolver which create the DNS message and sends it to a DNS recursive server.
> If you want to know the **actual** DNS server used by systemd-resolved, you can use the following command:
> `resolvectl status`

Using another DNS server (eg. `8.8.8.8`, which is the Google DNS server) is also possible via the following `@` syntax:

```sh
dig @8.8.8.8 facebook.com.
```

In both cases the output is hopefully the same. ðŸ˜Š Actually the `dig facebook.com.` command is the same as running:

```sh
dig facebook.com. A
```

Because the `dig` command will use the `A` record type by default in case no type argument is provided.

if you want to know, let's say the IPv6 address of Facebook, you can use the `AAAA` record type:

```sh
dig facebook.com. AAAA
```

Or what about the mail server of Facebook. We can use the `MX` record type:

```sh
dig facebook.com. MX
```

Next, let's start querying the root server. We talked earlier about root servers already. Let's see what the name server is for the `.com` TLD:

```sh
dig @a.root-servers.net. com.
```

The output include the name server (NS) records under `;; AUTHORITY SECTION:`, as well as A, AAAA records:

```sh
com.			172800	IN	NS	l.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	j.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	h.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	d.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	b.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	f.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	k.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	m.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	i.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	g.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	a.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	c.gtld-servers.net.
com.			172800	IN	NS	e.gtld-servers.net.
```

So there you have it, these are the top level domain servers for the `.com`. These DNS name servers have the information about all the dot com domains. What about the A and AAAA records? We will come back to that later.

You could now query the name .com top-level domain server records for let's say `google.com`:

```sh
dig @k.gtld-servers.net. google.com. NS
```

The answer you should get back under the `;; AUTHORITY SECTION:` section is:

```sh
google.com.		172800	IN	NS	ns2.google.com.
google.com.		172800	IN	NS	ns1.google.com.
google.com.		172800	IN	NS	ns3.google.com.
google.com.		172800	IN	NS	ns4.google.com.
```

That are the name servers for the `google.com` domain. Which can be queried in case of sub-domains like `mail.google.com` or `www.google.com`.

The `dig` response also included a `;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:` section as well:

```sh
;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
ns2.google.com.		172800	IN	AAAA	2001:4860:4802:34::a
ns2.google.com.		172800	IN	A	216.239.34.10
ns1.google.com.		172800	IN	AAAA	2001:4860:4802:32::a
ns1.google.com.		172800	IN	A	216.239.32.10
ns3.google.com.		172800	IN	AAAA	2001:4860:4802:36::a
ns3.google.com.		172800	IN	A	216.239.36.10
ns4.google.com.		172800	IN	AAAA	2001:4860:4802:38::a
ns4.google.com.		172800	IN	A	216.239.38.10
```

What is this? These are the glue records of the name servers. What are glue records?!?  
Glue records provide A (or AAAA) DNS records with the IP address of the name server(s). So for the Google name server `ns2.google.com.` will have both an A record and AAAA record, respeccialy set to: `216.239.34.10` and `2001:4860:4802:34::a`. OK.. but why?

The usecase for glue records is when you don't know the IP address behind the the name server, but the domain name is the same as the name server root-name.

Like how do you know the IP address of the name server `ns2.google.com`? You will need to know the IP address of the name server `google.com`. But you can find the IP address of the name server `google.com`. For that you will need to find the A record of that domain. But you will need to know the name server of that domain, but that will only tell you the name server domain, not the IP address etc. etc. This is causing a vicious circle. A glue record solves this problem, and breaks the vicious circle.

A DNS glue record is stored on a top-level domain server. And this extra information is under `;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:`. Like shown above.

### Reverse DNS

Reverse DNS is the opposite of a forward DNS look-up. Instead of looking up an IP address, a reverse DNS look-up looks up the domain name for a given IP address.

You can also use `dig` to execute a reverse DNS look-up by using the `-x` option. For example:

```sh
dig -x 8.8.8.8
```

The answer should be: `dns.google.` using a PTR (Pointer) DNS record.

We didn't talk about the `PTR` record type yet, but this type is used to map an IP address to a domain name. Thus only used for reverse DNS lookups.

Here is another example of a reverse DNS lookup:

```sh
dig -x 129.134.30.12
```

Can you figure out what the domain this IP is associated with?
